what makes gratitude so uncomfortable
for people feeling good in front of
people in our society is kind of kinky
now imagine you're sitting at a table at
a restaurant and one of your friends
like goes into ecstasy it's going to
make everybody really really
uncomfortable if you really allow
yourself to feel pleasure there's a
certain safety that comes with it but
there's also the lack of
self so I've been working with a CEO
client who recently they wanted to bring
more connection into their meetings into
their leadership meetings and so I asked
how if at all gratitude is involved in
in their meeting
process and first he was a little
shocked and then he kind of laughed and
squirmed a little bit and I was like
what's what's the squirm and he's like
yeah I just can't imagine explicitly
inviting my team to share things they're
grateful for in a structured way in our
meetings I just that just I'd be
embarrassed and you know I found that
fascinating and it's also not at all
uncommon uh somehow in especially in a
lot of business circles but kind of
across our culture in a lot of ways
gratitude is often seen as something
that's orthogonal or unrelated to
productivity or efficiency Superfluous
even
so in that spirit I want to take up an
entire
episode to talk about just
gratitude let's be super superflous let
be super list and just talk about
gratitude I love it let's do it and
let's also do it in a way that even the
most hardcore productivity nerds could
get behind Okay see if we can do that
sound good sounds good let's do it
awesome yeah so so kind of to start with
like in in our meetings internally in
AOA we we have this practice we always
take a moment to share something we're
grateful for we'll kind of do a round uh
We've even had entire meetings here at
AOA have been fully dedicated to
gratitude or celebration in critical
moments and I imagine that wasn't always
the case in your career as a
VC imagine that wasn't always the norm
and so I'm curious just to ask you first
to start this off how did that come to
be that gratitude became such an
explicit part of work culture for you
yeah yeah interestingly like it didn't
really happen in a lot of the board
meetings but our internal meetings
almost from the start as a venture
capitalist we did gratitude um and it
was my idea it came to be because I one
I just knew it was a really powerful
practice and the original thought was I
like I had no idea of all the benefits
that it would bring um and how for the
productivity nerds how much more
efficient and productive we would be
because of it
um but I just wanted a way for us to
connect and what I noticed was was that
most of the time we were spending we
were talking about problems what are the
problems you know occasionally we'd be
like this went
well but it you know most of the in
business in general it's just like you
spent a lot of time focused on what's
not going right and so and and and as
you should like if you're going to pay
attention to only the things that are
working in your company you're not going
to make improvements and you're probably
not going to get where you want to go so
you really want to focus on where you
can improve on things and so that
usually presents itself as a problem and
you're considering and thinking about
problems or thinking about how to make
something better but you're not
really being grateful for what's
happening and and what I just noticed is
that humans without that shared
experience of being grateful is just
harder to connect and so that's all it
was it was just like I wanted our team
to feel more connected because I knew
that would be good for me and I knew it
would be good for them and that's how it
started and then later I just found out
holy crap I had no idea how powerful of
a practice that is if it's done if it's
done well then it's an incredibly
powerful
practice Yeah beautiful yeah and and but
how how about you with gratitude like
was there any gratitude in Air Sports or
like like
how like was there like wow besides like
I'm grateful I didn't die like what how
was gratitude if at all a part of your
your world before this yeah well I mean
grateful I didn't die is it is a big one
but and there there's actually some like
depth to it but initially it was just
like this is a dream to be able to do
this thing that I like saw and then went
after and then did and be able to go in
the mountains with my friends and just
have these beautiful Vistas and have
these beautiful flying experiences yeah
there's a lot of gratitude for that and
it was you know very quickly when when
you're doing something that's really
risky what the [__] are you doing it for
if you're not really deeply enjoying it
and grateful for the experience uh so
quickly started to become obvious when I
was just starting to do it for the you
know for the goal achievement oriented
kind of aspect without really actually
being with a
gratitude um but there also it also
started to become really functional in a
in a deeper way uh for example if you if
you make any kind of jump you
are on some level your skill in your
training is involved and on some level
there's just luck and
Grace and so after any jump there would
just be a process of even during the
jump but like really after jump
especially one where something went a
little bit hairy you know and you're
like you got that like fear moving
through the system you got that
adrenaline and there's just like the I
found that the more that I let myself
really feel the gratitude
for for my own actions and behaviors and
skills and whatever but also just for
the configuration of reality that
occurred that allowed me to get through
the situation the more it actually
allowed me to really integrate what had
happened and update my you know update
my model update my decision- making
update my abilities and uh make
different decisions in the
future and uh and also be doing Le doing
it less from a seeking kind of a place
less from a chasing the dragon more from
the really reving in the
beauty yeah that makes a ton of
sense yeah that's cool thanks for sh
that yeah yeah so I want to kind of go
into like how do we in this work Define
gratitude what is it that we're talking
about here just so we can tease that out
relative to what people might perceive
gratitude to be yeah so I don't think
anybody's too confused about gratitude
it's you know the feeling of thanks or
gratefulness for a
situation I I think the the distinction
in our work compared
to other work is that it's a full body
sensation it's a full body sport
gratitude is not uh is not like you know
Thanksgiving dinner table I'm really
grateful for the food can I [__] eat
you know like it's not that it's a it's
a felt sense that is you know typically
tingly and warm
and and there's in it there's this
acknowledgement of something greater
than yourself the natural part of
gratitude is that it there's it's
something that's beyond you you know
when you like you said oh I could have
died like it's it wasn't completely up
to me that when it like hairy I might
have had something to do with it but
even that there's this acknowledgement
like oh man I turned just at the right
time and so there's
this and and in that is a relief of
pressure there's like the ego pressure
can can you know get sh out of the
balloon a little bit
because it just get it lets that
pressure out because there's an
acknowledgement that you're not fully in
control of this thing and I'm sure
there's viewers who are like I'm in
control of it it's like I my response
there would be you can't even decide the
next thought you're going to have or the
next 10 thoughts you're going to have
like so if you're not even making that
decision which is what's propelling all
the rest of your
decisions like there is there's
something greater moving and you know
life call it life if you want to but
there's just something that's beyond us
that's
occurring and um even if it's our
genetics right it's but it's not that
sense of ego and and in that there's a
so the sensation also comes with a
relief the the the emotion of gratitude
there's a kind of a certain sense of
expansion and a certain sense of relief
that comes with it yeah and so that
that's how I would describe it and if
you're not feeling it you don't get the
benefits of all the there all the many
benefits of gratitude you don't get them
if you if you're not actually allowing
yourself to experience the
Gratitude yeah and that leads really
well into my next question which is
around what makes gratitude so
uncomfortable for people
so you know not everybody but like there
there is a
certain there is a certain kind of
keeping at the borders and I imagine
that might be related to the uh the
egolessness of it the letting it come
from outside of oursel the the surrender
the that that is that can be a scary
experience especially if you're trying
to really get things done and you've got
a mission uh but I want to ask you like
what what do you think makes it not as
much of an explicit practice a full body
sport as you say in our
society funny about that is you asked me
the question I was like I have I don't
think I have an answer for that one and
then you're literally giving me the
answer with with like a while saying
it's like it comes from the
outside
likees um that was good uh yeah
what I think yes that probably some some
part of of it if not all of it comes
from the idea that you know there is
something Beyond you that you're not
fully in control and that can be scary
until you actually allow that feeling in
yeah um and usually it it comes also
just from a certain level of chaos what
I've noticed is there a certain amount
of Chaos in your earlier life it's
harder to get in touch with gratitude
except for maybe in Extreme Ways you
know something that's really like life
or death or something to that effect um
and so there's like there
a say again I wonder who that might
apply
to um I think the other thing that makes
it um difficult is that uh feeling good
in in front of people in our society is
is kind of kinky meaning we can laugh
together um but you know imagine you're
sitting at a a table at a restaurant and
one of your friends like goes into
ecstasy it's going to make everybody
really really uncomfortable I mean
even you know when you watch Tera eat
purple
potatoes exactly watching dare eat as an
example she takes so much pleasure in it
or you know I think it's why so even so
much of our sex is so you know
transactional even with ourselves like
it's masturbation is like a very
transactional thing is because that
pleasure to allow yourself to totally
feel the pleasure in a in a
way it makes people self-conscious often
times people feel shame around pleasure
and and so so that also happens it also
if you really allow yourself to feel
pleasure there's a certain safety that
comes with it and then there's that lack
of control but there's also the lack of
self
like you know if you feel a like what
people don't usually say is like I felt
total ecstasy and I felt very solid and
grounded in my sense of self like
ecstasy in itself is like oh it's kind
of trans transcendental it's like ah so
so so I think that's the other thing is
there's this loss of control/ self in in
feeling good that is even though
everybody wants it is a bit challenging
to allow or to let in which is why it's
not as prevalent in our society yeah and
so those are the
reasons and the only thing I'll add
there is in like groups are in
businesses it's even more profound than
that because it's we're supposed to be
serious we're supposed to be productive
I'm valuable by what I've
created and most of the people who are
really high performers in business this
isn't required to be a high performer
but what motivates a lot of people in
business is trying to satisfy a critical
parent or you know this feeling like
they're not good enough and then they
have something to prove and so to
actually allow themselves to feel
satisfied is scary because the sense of
identity goes away and their mind goes
if I allow myself to feel satisfied or
grateful well I'll stop trying I'll stop
being productive I'll stop being
ambitious yeah yeah when we've learned
to use the trauma or the those patterns
to drive us then it's scary to let them
go so yeah
gratitude unravels these things and
allows us to actually be present and
enjoy where we are then yeah yeah that
can really [__] with the mind a little
bit and so yeah it
does so kind of given that um given that
there's a sort of push pull here in in
society and in a lot of our our culture
what are when people do allow that
gratitude as a full body experience a
full body sport uh I want to talk a
little bit about what are some of the
like lwh hanging fruits of just doing a
little bit of practice of gratitude and
we'll later on talk about what that
practice looks like but I want to talk
about what are sort of the the easy
gains in the productivity sense and also
what are some of the benefits that are
available from doing a deeper practice
from really making it a
lifestyle yeah so I would say a deeper
like a little bit and a deeper practice
there's not too much of a difference
between them but we'll go into that as
we talk about the practice it's you know
maybe the difference of seven minutes a
day or something to that effect but
um so the okay so productivity wise the
first thing is gratitude really helps
you solve
problems um what that means is that
we're usually solving a problem with
what's wrong and how do I fix it h
gratitude allows you to say what's right
and how do I grow it so um I don't think
I've told this story but if I have I
apologize there was this classic story
of a guy who was in save the children or
Feed the Children or something like that
and he went to Vietnam and he wasn't
welcome and he only had a $50,000 budget
and his job was to like like stop
childhood
uh malnutrition in like an entire County
or two or something like that and he got
greed on the plane and they were like we
don't believe in you we want you gone
but we I've been told to let you try for
three months and he had no budget and so
he walked around he just looked and he
found one village where the kids weren't
malnourished and he noticed what they
were doing and they were taking the same
amount of rice but they were putting
into three meals instead of two they
were taking little um insects out of the
fields that look like micro and they put
them in the rice and they cut these
bitter greens and they chopped them
really finely and put them in the rice
and he saw that they did it and then he
brought all the mothers together and he
showed them all the difference in the
weight and the way the kids were and
everything like that and then the whole
County changed and so he solved the
problem by going what's right and how do
we grow that instead of what's wrong and
how do we fix it if he would have been
like how do I get another $50,000 how do
I convince the government to how do why
like that's one way to solve the problem
this was a completely different one so
that's one thing really helps you solve
the problem and particularly helps you
solve a problem in another way too which
is if you start doing gratitude practice
and you learn that you can be grateful
for difficult
[__] not it's going to be okay not not
like denying the pain of difficult stuff
but actually being grateful for the pain
of difficult stuff uh then you see
opportunities where very few people see
the
opportunities where it's like oh it's co
and like if you can really get into the
Gratitude oh I get to be home alone with
my family and I get to really like focus
on myself and here are some things I'm
grateful for yeah I'm not going to say
it doesn't suck but in that then you can
say oh well what do I want to do I want
to learn while I'm home alone oh I could
do an online course and then you you're
taking advantage of an opportunity so
that's another one two ways that it
solves problems uh that just gives you a
whole different set of problems and
another great benefit is you know I
think we talked about this in the money
episode but uh if you have poverty
mentality around anything time
money um smarts whatever it a lot of
that is because you define yourself as
stressed or you define yourself as not
smart or you define yourself as poor if
you start time doing gratitude in a way
that allows you to see the wealth that
you do have to see the intelligence that
you do have you change your definition
of yourself and so that also solves
problems I don't I countless people I
know have done like a 10-minute
gratitude a day on something that they
feel like they have lack of and they're
just grateful for all the ways they
don't have lack like oh yeah I'm poor
and I have a house to live in and I have
food on the table and having like a deep
gratitude for that not just saying it
but having that deep
gratitude I don't know how many people I
know who that has totally helped them
transition their money
issues so so that's another great
solution that works as a team too as a
company you can do the practice of
here's what we're shy of let's be
grateful for all that we do have and it
turns you
know lack of resources into
resourcefulness so that's another really
great one um in that is the changing a
sense of self gratitude can really
change your sense of self and we behave
mostly by who we think we are not by
anything else you know if we think that
we are studious we study if we think
that we
love working out than we work out and so
if you're working out and you're
grateful oh I'm so grateful that I want
to work out I'm so grateful that I told
myself it's time to work out I'm so
grateful for working out I'm so grateful
for how I feel when I'm finished working
out you're going to keep working out
like eventually that that identity is
going to come into place of you're the
person grateful to work out instead of
you're the person who doesn't work out
and says you should work out yeah so
that's another one yeah or or somebody
who's been told by their parents that
they're that they're manipulative
because they have the emotions and needs
that they're manipulative and so then
they end up learning to be manipulative
and then the Gratitude could be oh you
know what yeah I'm actually really
cunning yeah that's great right right or
I'm
grateful I'm grateful that I had needs
I'm grateful that I expressed my needs
I'm grateful that I stood for the stuff
that I needed even in ways that I
couldn't I'm I look at all the ways that
I'm also just kind and
generous and and then all of a sudden
you're a person who respects other
people's needs and your own needs yeah
and the manipulation if there is any
just kind of flips away so that's
another one yeah so sense change of
identity um it it speeds transformation
so if you're transforming
and you are constantly thinking I'm not
going fast enough this isn't working
just like the working out thing why is
there any change I this is all going to
go away I wonder if this is going to
last all that shit's going to slow you
down if you're like oh I'm so grateful I
saw that I'm so grateful that I did this
I'm so grateful I did the class and like
again you feel it not just say it like I
was but like really feel that deep
gratitude
um then then yeah it speeds trans
transformation instead of slows it down
so that's another really good one
including in a company if you can show
gratitude for the changes that are
happening in the right direction it
totally speeds that transformation so
um and I'd say the last one that I
there's others but just because I'm
rambling at this point a little bit um
there's just an emotional yoga thing
that happens as well which is because
positive feelings are difficult for us
this is a practice of actually allowing
that emotional experience into your
world and so it just begets more of
those emotional experiences so once you
start opening up to them you stop being
as scared of them they just are more
plentiful of sudden there everywhere and
there's sh God it's like it's hard for
me to walk through a day and not see a
thousand things to be grateful
for yeah one one thing that strikes me
from all the things you just listed is
that gratitude seems to just be like the
universal acid for doubt just like
striking cutting through
doubt yeah I I usually say that it's
like you can't have doubt with a closed
heart um but I like that because in a
weird way one of the things about
gratitude is that it it open you can't
have gratitude with a closed Target yeah
like there's an openness to there's a
required openness to experience
gratitude yeah and
openness yeah which which also might be
why people are scared to do it because
you know letting love in is really
[__] scary for most folks right and
that that the same goes for the relief
the there's the the letting go of the
tension the patterns
that that also requires the open heart
and that that I think interplays with a
lot of the the benefits that you just
described is that relief of tension
yeah the other thing I'll say for all
the non-productivity Nerds out there it
just [__] makes life feel good so
what's the benefit it just feels [__]
good like if you want to feel good do
gratitude yeah yeah well that statement
seems like it answered the next question
that came to mind but I still want to
ask it which is yeah how do you know if
what you're feeling is actually if what
you're feeling is gratitude and you're
really letting it happen and it's not
just a dissociative form of positivity
positive thinking or looking the bright
side yeah or telling yourself you
shouldn't feel bad that's a great
question uh I mean yes it's going to
feel really good it's it's you're not
going to con you're not gonna have to
con there's no convincing in real
gratitude of yourself or of anybody
else um so that's one clue it like
physically feels really good that's
another clue I think the other the other
like this one's a little more subtle
um
but
um if you're like when I do gratitude
sometimes I cry when I have gratitude
sometimes I'm there's
anger
um so it's it's not denying another
emotional experience it's not trying
there's no trying in it and you're not
pushing something down to feel this
gratitude the feel the experience of
gratitude is it encompasses everything I
can be really grateful about my anger
and I can be really grateful about my
sadness and I can be really grateful for
my fear in fact oftentimes being
grateful about the things that we find
difficult is incredibly
transformative yeah so I'm hearing this
a lot about the the breadth and the
depth of where gratitude exists and is
applied that's so there's kind of
emotional yoga in expanding the range of
motion of
where we can allow the Gratitude to be
that's right in our
experience yeah that's right
yeah yeah I'm curious to get just kind
of like a any tips for people who who
want to step into that flow of the
Gratitude without forcing it or trying
what's what is a what is a good way to
to really be in that allowing and let
that current move
you yeah I mean the the so trying to get
there is going to not bring you there so
like there's no trying that can
gratitude almost feels like a receiving
so that's part of it it's like oh I'm
not trying to get there I'm receiving
gratitude is it is more of the feeling
of it
and the other thing that I would say
is it's there's a there's always
something spectacular
happening and
so the job is to so there the job you
don't have to find it you know like you
don't have to like go searching for
something to be grateful for it's
there's just always something in front
of you is oh here like here we are I'm
speaking on a zoom thing I don't have to
go to recording studio anymore I get to
talk and be with people like you and
people listen and what the hell and
people love this podcast what like whoa
like like it's all all all around just
not to even mention the technology like
if you saw my rig and the fact that I
can afford this you know that that
almost you know anybody working can
afford this if this is what they want to
do and the microphones like and the
technology is
stunning so the to feel the Gratitude it
it's going and searching for it is like
this lack of faith faith in
it and and so it it pushes it away from
you rather than just oh it's there is
something right here to be grateful for
I don't have to
look just the idea that you're wanting
to be grateful is something to be
grateful
for yeah that's beautiful I really like
that and uh I also want to talk about so
this was this was sort of like
how this was about feeling the gratitude
and also there's the aspect of you know
there's there's the way people might
cling to it and want it to stick around
but also there's something really
valuable and just noticing the ways that
we fall off of it you know like kind of
like walking a slack line I've talked
about before is the process of learning
all the ways you fall so that you notice
them and bring yourself back
or fight them less and so I'm curious
what are some of the ways that when
people feel gratitude and it is
overwhelming and then
skip away from it what what are some of
the different ways that that occurs so
that people can become aware and notice
more so much in that besides your
question that I want to answer so so
I'll answer your question last so
so so one thing is if you notice that
you have fallen away from gratitude
that's something to be grateful
for because you've noticed like the the
harder thing is when you don't notice
notice but the good news is when you
don't notice there's nothing you can do
so so it's like so then it shows up and
it's like and everybody like what a lot
of people do God damn it I wasn't gr
grateful when they remember instead of
oh oh look at that I'm like I can be
grateful again I'm grateful that I just
remembered that like so that's that's
one thing the other thing is like I
don't want gratitude to become like
moral or like something that has to be
done or that you should be doing that'll
take all the joy right out of gratitude
and there there won't be any
gratitude there to find because it's
becomes this big should
so I think that in itself to realize
that gratitude isn't a should makes
gratitude a more available and less
intense um now for your question which
is yeah if you really get into gratitude
it can be incredibly overwhelming and
and I will just say the thing that the
fear that arises and deep gratitude is
is is the fear of our freedom it's the
fear of our identity slipping
away
and yeah you like take it take your time
with it you know like take you know
allow your system to to to to digest
what it can digest and
and just the knowing that this is just a
solution and it's the thing I'm actually
looking for the thing that's scary is
the fact that I'm looking for this thing
and I'm finding it the same way like the
you might feel like in the last stage of
a video game and you're like you're oh
my God I'm here and I'm I could almost
get finished and then [__] you know yeah
um the same it's the same thing and so
to just to know that actually is
incredibly helpful
and and the other one is if you are in
the overwhelm see what like what makes
it not
pleasurable like overwhelm is
overwhelming but it can be really
pleasurable overwhelm is usually you
know as we've talked about before it's
it's like we're not letting ourselves
feel the whole thing so the overwhelm
typically is the resistance to the
Gratitude not the Gratitude
itself and take your time with it
there's no rush like there's you know
you don't have to you don't have to like
you don't there you know the thing about
that's the other thing about gratitude
is there's a way in which it creates a
gentleness that allows us to you know
more like the the Marines say I guess or
the Army slow as steady steady as fast
or slow as smooth smooth as fast I can't
remember one smoth as fast yeah yeah
there's like a there's something about
that too with gratitude yeah it allows
you to
to be at a pace that's actually most
productive even though it feels a little
slow yeah so slowly moving to this next
uh what comes up for me right now I as I
Was preparing for this episode I thought
of like okay a lot of people talk about
gratitude and there's a lot of people
who talk a lot about gratitude and I
don't see them necessarily living it or
I don't necessarily see their lives
transforming um yeah and so I want to
really make sure that we like this
episode has has some juice has some meat
and so I I sat down and I thought about
different projections that we might have
onto gratitude that I that I've seen
that I've seen in myself and so I'm
curious to kind of go through a couple
of these and see see what what comes up
here uh the first one that showed up for
me was uh a pattern before we before we
go there I just want to say I have
another idea where we could actually
just do a gratitude practice at the end
of this like you and I
D oh cool okay cool okay I'm not letting
us get out of that oh that's happening
Jo yeah that's happening yeah cool great
um but yeah the first one that I came up
with uh that I've noticed is when when
we see gratitude as a result something
that's
caused uh once I have XYZ then I'll be
able to feel the Gratitude but if and if
I'm not feeling gratitude now it must be
because something some condition isn't
right yes and that needs to change so
that I can feel a Gra
itude
oh yeah
um that's a great question I you don't
have a question there so I don't really
have an answer I could just go through
these on a list and see like what pops
for you and you're like oh that's
something I have something to say on
okay well I I can definitely say
something on that which
is oh that's [__] hell that's
like uh right it's the same thing as
like once I am a certain way I can be
loved and and then I can act
lovable but acting lovable is actually
the thing about being loved it's like
it's allowing the love in and it's the
same thing with gratitude
gratitude yeah that that
it in a weird way it's like if you're it
takes a tremendous amount of
ego and it's not the ego maybe that we
think of like we're the greatest thing
ever but there's a tremendous amount of
ego meaning
self-de to not to say I can't be
grateful until X Y and Z happens it's
like really not acknowledging all your
ancestors the people who are providing
the lights for you who built your house
the electricity that came in the
technology that you're using like all
the ways that you are
supported it is really just saying [__]
you to all that support M all the all
that effort in the world and that
requires a real
ego to do that yeah that makes my
heartbreak a little bit yeah yeah and
there's there's the flip side of that
one which is using gratitude as a
strategy yeah like I'm I'm gonna be
grateful so that XYZ happens which is
interesting because we're talking about
all the benefits of gratitude and so I
want to kind of challenge us like what
is the what's the difference here
between like really feeling gratitude
and getting the benefits of it and
relegating gratitude to a strategy that
is just for an
outcome so I mean what I would say is
that most of the stuff that we teach if
you do it to get to the place it stops
working gratitude is not one of those
things
interestingly assuming that you're
feeling it ah like like if you're
feeling the Gratitude it kind of self
corrects it's like this amazing tool
that it just like it's like you you
become so grateful that the outcome
starts like becoming kind of silly and
then you don't you're not so concerned
about the outcome and then the outcome
happen so it's like one of the few tools
that we teach that actually
self-corrects if you're actually feeling
it now if you're saying I'm I'm really
grateful for money for these six reasons
so that I can be rich then you're [__]
because you're not going to feel it but
if you really feel it it self corrects
which is odd it's it's one of the few
that I can point you that does that yeah
yeah I love that and another one that
came up is using it as a scorecard or a
measurement whether that is in the sense
of like am I there yet am I enlightened
yet or in the sense of like I'm going to
project or I'm going to display my
gratitude so people can see where I'm at
in my journey like both of those seem
like different ways of like using
gratitude as a as a measurement or
scorecard how
does yeah do you have to say about that
how does that play in here oh I would
say it's not a great
scorecard um and
and and
like the other thing about gratitude is
it's
like it's this weird thing right where
there's this great study of people
picking tomatoes and they say we'll pay
you more money if you pick more Tomatoes
like there's this and what it ended up
doing is making everybody pick less
tomatoes and that doesn't work with all
humans so everybody but the majority of
humans they just pick less potatoes I
mean sorry tomatoes and um so I think
it's a really similar
thing if you are scoring yourself on
your
development it slows down the
process
like if there's a map and you're like
paying attention to it just think oh
what might happen next or whatever but
if you're engaged in like how do I
become how do I get to the next level
how do I get to the next stage there's
there's a certain slowness that that
creates gratitude
also over time starts taking away that
desire if you're doing gratitude a
lot the desire to score yourself doesn't
matter because you've got the thing at
the end right like if you're grateful
all the time on a regular basis you've
already won the game so why do you give
a [__] about the scorecard and yet you
still are productive and you're still
ambitious and you still want to do a lot
of [__] but you're not doing it from
that sense of lack or that sense of
anxiety uh and and therefore you do
things smoother with more intention with
more
Effectiveness because you're not
bringing that fear that chases everybody
away
mhm yeah and and speaking of
the sort of the in the relation to
everybody aspect here uh another piece
that I noticed is just around shame like
when gratitude feels shameful or
embarrassing or something that we feel
like we need to have socially earned or
deserve I I imagine there being a common
pattern of like I can feel gratitude in
my in the secrecy of my heart or when
I'm alone but if I'm if I'm flaunting it
out there running around showing my
gratitude letting people see it then
I'll
be I'll be shamed I'll be attacked I'll
be uh making people feel bad I'm curious
about that
pattern yeah it's there's some truth to
that meaning you know if you're grateful
and you show it you will get some
skepticism maybe a little attack but
usually a little bit of skepticism
because if somebody can't feel the
Gratitude they are going to be skeptical
of your gratitude and
[Music]
so and that that used to stop me
honestly it used to stop me from showing
my gratitude and um now [__]
them you can be skeptical all you want
and what I notice is
that they usually cave in about 10 like
like if I'm grateful for them and I'm
just and and I I'm making sure that I'm
never grateful as a way to chase their
love or to make them happy I think
that's actually a real pothole of
gratitude of
like wow I'm really grateful for you
it's like like that's just people
pleasing um but if you're there's an
authentic gratitud that comes up and you
say it with somebody almost all
folks you know in the sixth sth 8th nth
10th one is going to start
like they're just they're not going to
be into the like skeptical of you
thinking you're doing it to kiss their
ass or
whatever um typically and if they still
are after 10 it's a really good there's
a really good question to be asked which
is like what am I doing hanging out with
this
person right like one of the things that
happens when
you when you have gratitude practice is
people around you start becoming more
grateful or they go away like or there's
just more people around you that are
grateful I
like I think about our community and
like gratitude is normal in our
community
and so and and like my personal life and
like that's just part of who I want to
hang out with and and like a life that I
like
leading and so so to some degree that
they just go
away so that's why I just do it because
I'm standing for I'm standing for the
future that I want to live in by living
in right now I'm going to be grateful
and we'll see who sleps
off yeah and who meets me yeah I love
that so I have uh we've talked a little
bit about how gratitude even for the
difficult experiences are in the midst
of grief and difficulty can be really
really beneficial and growthful and I
want to share just kind of like a really
brief story and then ask your thoughts
on this uh there's a friend of mine who
was recently in a base jumping accident
and
they they broke a bunch of Bones
including their hand and they somehow
managed to use their broken hand to pull
out their phone you know they called
their girlfriend and of course first
asked the girlfriend how she was doing
and listened to her talk about her day
before mentioning that they were broken
and waiting for a
helicopter
um which is just hilarious on a totally
different level um wow when I heard
about this and uh I uh
when he he was receiving calls in the
hospital I called him and I was like hey
what's going on like how are you tell me
tell me how he told me that whole story
um but I was like and how are you
holding up I asked and he's just like I
don't understand it but I'm just like so
full of
gratitude for he's just like yeah you
know I mean the the helicopter was there
quickly the people were there to like
rescue me I got to the hospital people
have been treating me really well um but
also like there's a weird way I'm
actually grateful for the for the whole
thing like already you're still laid up
in the hospital broken and you're like
what how and so so that's my my question
for you is like what what have you seen
in in all your uh in all this work
around how gratitude influences
post-traumatic
growth yeah
so yeah it's really interesting there's
something there I read something about I
don't quote me but I read some article I
never verified it but it was about
lottery winners and people who had some
sort of like significant accident and
the people won the lot lottery like
three years later really weren't
grateful for the fact that they they're
just like that was [__] like they
were poor again nothing you know whereas
the people who got in these really bad
accidents were great had gratitude had
like more gratitude and were
happier and
and so I've read a little bit about
the how a lot of folks find gratitude
through significant injury I'm talking
like paralyzation and stuff like that
like I
think being confronted with the
fragility of life is something that
brings us closer to gratitude generally
um almost losing our life brings us
closer I think
also it's like one of the few ways out
if you are paralyzed or something like
that you know there's a there's
just having gratitude accepting what is
and having gratitude like can relieve
half the pain
and fighting it is just horrendous and
so to some degree I think it's it's
forced on a certain certain group of
people because there's just like it's
either that or I'm going to just go
crazy in my head wondering what if I
would have done this what if I would
have done that or crazy in my head
because I'm constantly going I could
have I could have I could I should have
I should have why me why me why me all
that will just drive you nuts so at some
point you like you have an option to do
that or to and then the contrast of that
will make you feel so like that
gratitude feels so [__] sweet like
it's so sweet um because you've been
living in this [__] hole of I could have
I wish I would have why me you know that
whole thing so I think that's that that
that's my guess as to that and just like
holy [__] I almost lost everything and
so that really makes things present yeah
um yeah it's interesting it also
seems like to some degree those
moments like the further those moments
get away the Gratitude seems to
dissipate for some fkks like there's
like a little like life gets back to
normal and the there's not quite as much
gratitud is like you know when they
first Discover it it
seems um so yeah it's it's a strange
it's a strange phenomenon but please you
don't have to go through that to find
gratitude it's it's almost as though
there's like a like a resource of
gratitude that like comes up it's like a
homeostatic response that our body just
has sometimes it's like okay this is
actually going to be what is need needed
for healing and it's actually available
to us all the time it's in a natural
state and yeah when we have like little
problems or big problems that feel like
big problems in our story we might not
feel like we have access to it but then
something just cracks through it like
happened for Byron Katy or for
Buckminster Fuller each have stories
involving this yeah yeah yeah yeah I
think that yeah I think that's
beautifully said and I love the idea
that like it's for our healing but
that's like a more succinct way to
discuss gra we could have used that as
the as the definition what is gratitude
it is it is a healing medicine it like
there is something deeply healing about
gratitude that's beautiful yeah yeah
it's why I call it one of the
foundations of doing any transformative
work it is incredibly important for if
you're doing transformative work if you
do this it'll definitely like it's a
really like the right fuel for the
engine yeah yeah I'm just thinking now
of people who sign up for master class
and they're like okay I'm going to do
this like leadership development program
and step one I'm gonna start with my
homework gratitude practice
gratitude every
day oh boy oh boy oh
goodness but I mean you see all the
transformation and gratitude all the
healing that I mean sorry all the
transformation that
happen you see all the transformation
that happens in and and groundbreakers
and like it's like everybody's going
through these big shifts and nobody's
like oh it's the Gratitude that's doing
it but it's the base it's like the fuel
for all of it um because it's the daily
it is the daily practice really and
so so it's it's it's easy to overlook
but it is absolutely in my mind one of
the things that makes MH uh master class
so effective yeah yeah so I want to
leave then uh leave our listeners with
some concrete practice that they can
bring into their lives to bring
gratitude into their their personal
their work um maybe start with the
general like what what is just the the
core practice like one one really
Baseline thing that people can
do yeah so it's just best with another
person anybody um if you can't find
somebody reach out to our community
there's people who want to do it where
you just sit across with somebody and
you say one of you says you're grateful
for something you saber that the other
person says they're grateful for
something you saber that first person
says they're grateful for something you
saber that and you just go back and
forth for seven 10
minutes
um the important aspects there is that
you keep the Gratitude
short the and the reason for that is if
you make the gratitudes long which
people have the propensity to do I'm
really grateful for
and then also this and because of this
and the other thing often times there
would be a lot of hedges in those
sentences and the other thing is it puts
you in your head so you don't get the
full visceral experience sematic
experience of gratitude so it's really
important to make the gratitudes very
short um always less than a sentence
definitely not a run-on sentence or a
compound
sentence um I mean it you might mess up
once or twice it doesn't matter but
generally you're you're being as concise
as possible
and then the other thing is to feel the
Gratitude before you say
it so it's not a full body sport it's a
full body sport so it's not
a and if you need to say something to
yourself for a while to get yourself
into the Gratitude or think of something
to get yourself into the Gratitude
that's fine but like have the visceral
sensation of it and then
speak the thing you're grateful for and
then if you want to up the if you want
to like take it to the next level after
you're like nice and sunk in then you
can start finding things you're grateful
for that are that are a little difficult
you know it's a something that's a trial
find something you're grateful for
inside of a trial or a problem that
you're
having that's it awesome that's how you
do it and what would be a couple of
quick practices that could be brought
into a workplace for example into like a
meeting format as as a leader do what we
do is like we start the meetings with
the round of gratitudes or a couple we
used to do a couple rounds of gratitudes
um and really have it like again be a
full body sport when it's done like have
the explanation um so that's one uh
gratitude uh the other thing that you
can do um is if you have a problem
that's intractable
or
um like two people are fighting or
something like that to share a gratitude
about like what's the the gratitude for
the opportunity in the situation so you
can start solving problems like if if
you have a problem that you're all
solving together that feels like hard or
something like that you can say hey
let's just do a gratitude for the
problem and then everybody can show
gratitude for what you know what is
potent the potential of learning or what
they're learning or what they get to do
because of this problem and then solve
the problem and that changes that
usually helps a lot quicker yeah opens
up the problem space the solution space
yeah right I love it that's right right
instead where usually people come in and
they're like oh I got to solve this I'm
not going to solve this like which is
really not kind of the self-fulfilling
best problem solving state of mind
yeah awesome well how about a round of
gratitudes to close this how about a
round of gratitudes for um
for our prob listeners and viewers yeah
oh that's great yeah yeah yeah I'd like
that yeah I am so grateful every time uh
this almost feels like an ask but [__]
it I'm just going to go with the
gratitude that came up but I'm starting
with feeling it I really am grateful for
every time I've seen someone share this
work share this podcast share what we're
doing on social media but primarily just
when I see when I feel the energy in it
of like how grateful they are
we're we're GNA start again because that
long one is exactly and it was for the
reasons like you don't need any yeah I'm
really grateful when people share you
say it like that it'll come across yeah
yeah okay let's start it again
okay I am just so
grateful there's a performance in
[Music]
[Laughter]
there I'm really grateful to see how
much people have been loving the work
and sharing it on social media
it just feels so
good so so
good I am
grateful that so many people who are
listening to the podcast showed up to
our
free Q&A this
morning that felt so good to have so
many people who knew the work coming
instead of people who didn't know the
work
coming I just did it too long too [__]
sorry yeah again yeah I
uh I am grateful that uh so many
listeners showed up for our free Q&A
today and that they had this base of of
work from the podcast when they showed
up it was
lovely I'm grateful that there are
listeners who have been with us from the
beginning several years ago and they
still reach out with questions
and appreciations and
gratitudes I love receiving gratitudes
from
listeners feels so
good uh I'm
grateful uh that I get to do it with
you and that people get to
experience us
I'm grateful that there's a 100 plus
episode record of our
journey as teacher student co-
facilitators
friends business partners the whole
thing I'm grateful um for the stories of
people listening to a podcast
and crying or pulling over the side of
the road to puke mhm where the where the
the they where viewers take it in and
really allow it into their body I'm very
grateful for
that I'm grateful for the times that I
hear of somebody who i' I'd never made
any contact with they've never come to
one of our courses but they've been
listening to the podcast and it's
been impactful for them and when I hear
that I'm like wow I never
even never even
knew I'm grateful that we are in the top
35 self-help podcasts of all time
because of our
listeners that they yeah that feels so
good according to good pods thank you
good pods according to good pods
and lastly I'm grateful I got to see the
eclipse and see with my eyes the
perspective on the solar system that
that made available that was
[Music]
cool awesome yeah thanks for a great
great podcast yeah thank you
Joe thank you
everybody I feel all mushy
and yeah gush now so don't even know how
to close us out like us and
things send us gratitude we're on social
media find
us if you want to don't if you don't
bring gratitude in your life and spread
it around enjoy it take care